
On Testing Randomness
---------------------

+ RFC-1750

+ Knuth, "The Art of Computer Programming" (volume 2)

+ NIST publication 800-22

+ FIPS publication 140-2


Different Kinds of Randomness
-----------------------------

+ Chaitin-Kolmogorov randomness (Algorithmic randomness), defined in terms of computational
  models. A string of bits is random iff it is shorter than any program that can produce it.

+ Statistical randomness, defined as having no recognizable patterns or regularities (in the
  long run).

+ "True" randomness, defined as being unpredictable.

How are these different definitions related?


Bias Removal
------------

The output of the RNG will, most likely, contain bias (more 1s than 0s or visa-versa). The bias
can be removed with hardware filtering or in software after the fact. Hardware bias removal
methods include: feeding back the output to adjust the generator, using two generators with
different mechanisms, beating the output against an uncorrelated clock, etc. Software bias
removal methods include: von Neumann decorrelation, XOR with output of cryptographically strong
PRNG, XOR two correlated bit streams together (see "piling-up" lemma), use a secure hash on the
bits (little theoretical support?)

von Neumann decorrelation:
  00, 11 -> throw away
  10     -> 1
  01     -> 0

This forces 50% occurance of 1 (and, of course, 0) bits , but it throws away 75% of the bits.
Alternatively one might XOR adjacent bits together. This only throws away 50% of the bits.

Both hardware and software "whitening" techniques should be used. Statistical tests on the
device should probably be done before software bias removal so that the tests can better observe
changes in the underlying hardware.


Security Analysis
-----------------

Since this system will be used in security sensitive applications it may make sense to do a
careful security review of the software and system design. It would be especially nice to use
some formal methods in that review, but that may be too time consuming for the first version.

